<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Butcher’s Bills</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-butchers-bills" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Butcher’s Bills</h2>
			<section id="the-butchers-bills-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Husband and Wife</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>I am going to tell a story of married life. My title will prepare the reader for something hardly heroic; but I trust it will not be found lacking in the one genuine and worthy interest a tale ought to have⁠—namely, that it presents a door through which we may walk into one region or another of the human heart, and there find ourselves not altogether unacquainted or from home.</p>
				<p>There was a law among the Jews which forbade the yoking together of certain animals, either because, being unequal in size or strength, one of them must be oppressed, or for the sake of some lesson thus embodied to the Eastern mind⁠—possibly for both reasons. Half the tragedy would be taken out of social life if this law could be applied to human beings in their various relations. I do not say that this would be well, or that we could afford to lose the result of the tragedy thus occasioned. Neither do I believe that there are so many instances of unequal yoking as the misprising judgments of men by men and women by women might lead us to imagine. Not everyone declared by the wisdom of acquaintance to have thrown himself or herself away must therefore be set down as unequally yoked. Or it may even be that the inequality is there, but the loss on the other side. How some people could ever have come together must always be a puzzle until one knows the history of the affair; but not a few whom most of us would judge quite unsuited to each other do yet get on pretty well from, the first, and better and better the longer they are together, and that with mutual advantage, improvement, and development. Essential humanity is deeper than the accidents of individuality; the common is more powerful than the peculiar; and the honest heart will always be learning to act more and more in accordance with the laws of its being. It must be of much more consequence to any lady that her husband should be a man on whose word she can depend than that he should be of a gracious presence. But if instead of coming nearer to a true understanding of each other, the two should from the first keep falling asunder, then something tragic may almost be looked for.</p>
				<p>Duncan and Lucy Dempster were a couple the very mention of whose Christian names together would have seemed amusing to the friends who had long ceased to talk of their unfitness. Indeed, I doubt if in their innermost privacy they ever addressed each other except as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster. For the first time to see them together, no one could help wondering how the conjunction could have been effected. Dempster was of Scotch descent, but the hereditary high cheekbone seemed to have got into his nose, which was too heavy a pendant for the low forehead from which it hung. About an inch from the end it took a swift and unexpected curve downwards, and was a curious and abnormal nose, which could not properly be assorted with any known class of noses. A long upper lip, a large, firm, and not quite ugly mouth, with a chin both long and square, completed a face which, with its low forehead, being yet longer than usual, had a particularly equine look. He was rather under the middle height, slender, and well enough made⁠—altogether an ordinary mortal, known on ’Change as an able, keen, and laborious man of business. What his special business was I do not know. He went to the city by the eight o’clock omnibus every morning, dived into a court, entered a little square, rushed up two flights of stairs to a couple of rooms, and sat down in the back one before an office table on a hair-seated chair. It was a dingy place⁠—not so dirty as it looked, I daresay. Even the windows, being of bad glass, did, I believe, look dirtier than they were. It was a place where, so far as the eye of an outsider could tell, much or nothing might be doing. Its occupant always wore his hat in it, and his hat always looked shabby. Some people said he was rich, others that he would be one day. Some said he was a responsible man, whatever the epithet may have been intended to mean. I believe he was quite as honest as the recognized laws of his trade demanded⁠—and for how many could I say more? Nobody said he was avaricious⁠—but then he moved amongst men whose very notion was first to make money, after that to be religious, or to enjoy themselves, as the case might be. And no one either ever said of him that he was a good man, or a generous. He was about forty years of age, looking somehow as if he had never been younger. He had had a fair education⁠—better than is generally considered necessary for mercantile purposes⁠—but it would have been hard to discover any signs of it in the spending of his leisure. On Sunday mornings he went with his wife to church, and when he came home had a good dinner, of which now and then a friend took his share. If no stranger was present he took his wine by himself, and went to sleep in his easy chair of marone-coloured leather, while his wife sat on the other side of the fire if it was winter, or a little way off by the open window if it was summer, gently yawned now and then, and looked at him with eyes a little troubled. Then he went off again by the eight o’clock omnibus on Monday morning, and not an idea more or less had he in his head, not a hair’s-breadth of difference was there in his conduct or pursuits, that he had been to church and had spent the day out of business. That may, however, for anything I know, have been as much the clergyman’s fault as his. He was the sort of man you might call machine-made, one in whom humanity, if in no wise caricatured, was yet in no wise ennobled.</p>
				<p>His wife was ten years younger than he⁠—hardly less than beautiful⁠—only that over her countenance seemed to have gathered a kind of haze of commonness. At first sight, notwithstanding, one could not help perceiving that she was china and he was delft. She was graceful as she sat, long-necked, slope-shouldered, and quite as tall as her husband, with a marked daintiness about her in the absence of the extremes of the fashion, in the quality of the lace she wore on her black silk dress, and in the wide white sleeves of fine cambric that covered her arms from the shoulder to the wrist. She had a morally delicate air, a look of scrupulous nicety and lavender-stored linen. She had long dark lashes; and when they rose, the eyelids revealed eyes of uncommon beauty. She had good features, good teeth, and a good complexion. The main feeling she produced and left was of ladyhood⁠—little more.</p>
				<p>Sunday afternoon came fifty-two times in the year. I mention this because then always, and nearly then only, could one calculate on seeing them together. It came to them in a surburb of London, and the look of it was dull. Doubtless <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster’s dinner and his repose after it were interesting to him, but I cannot help thinking his wife found it dreary. She had, however, got used to it. The house was a good old one, of red brick, much larger than they required, but not expensive, and had a general look of the refinement of its mistress. In the summer the windows of the dining-room would generally be open, for they looked into a really lovely garden behind the house, and the scent of the jasmine that crept all around them would come in plentifully. I wonder what the scent of jasmine did in Duncan Dempster’s world. Perhaps it never got farther than the general antechamber of the sensorium. It often made his wife sad⁠—she could not tell why. To him I daresay it smelt agreeable, but I can hardly believe it ever woke in him that dreamy sensation it gave her⁠—of something she had not had enough of, she could not say what. When the heat was gone off a little he would walk out on the lawn, which was well kept and well watered, with many flowering shrubs about it. Why he did so, I cannot tell. He looked at nothing in particular, only walked about for a few minutes, no doubt derived some pleasure of a mild nature from something, and walked in again to tea. One might have expected he would have cultivated the acquaintance of his garden a little, if it were only for the pleasure the contrast would give him when he got back to his loved office, for a greater contrast could not well have been found than between his dingy dreary haunt on weekdays⁠—a place which nothing but duty could have made other than repugnant to any free soul⁠—and this nest of greenery and light and odour. Sweet scents floated in clouds invisible about the place; flower eyes and stars and bells and bunches shone and glowed and lurked all around; his very feet might have learned a lesson of that which is beyond the sense from the turf he trod; but all the time, if he were not exactly seeing in his mind’s eye the walls and tables of his office in the City square, his thoughts were not the less brooding over such business as he there transacted. For <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster’s was not a free soul. How could it be when all his energies were given to making money? This he counted his <em>calling</em>⁠—and I believe actually contrived to associate some feeling of duty with the notion of leaving behind him a plump round sum of money, as if money in accumulation and following flood, instead of money in peaceful current, were the good thing for the world! Hence the whole realm of real life, the universe of thought and growth, was a high-hedged park to him, within which he never even tried to look⁠—not even knowing that he was shut out from it, for the hedge was of his own growing. What shall ever wake such a man to a sense of indwelling poverty, or make him begin to hunger after any lowliest expansion? Does a reader retort, “The man was comfortable, and why should he be troubled?” If the end of being, I answer, is only comfort in self, I yield. But what if there should be at the heart of the universe a Thought to which the being of such men is distasteful? What if to that Thought they look blots in light, ugly things? May there not lie in that direction some possible reason why they should bethink themselves? Dempster, however, was not yet a clinker out of which all the life was burned, however much he looked like one. There was in him that which might yet burn⁠—and give light and heat.</p>
				<p>On the Sunday evenings <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster would have gladly gone to church again, if only⁠—though to herself she never allowed this for one of her reasons⁠—to slip from under the weight of her husband’s presence. He seldom spoke to her more than a sentence at a time, but he did like to have her near him, and I suppose held, through the bare presence, some kind of dull one-sided communication with her; what did a woman know about business? and what did he know about except business? It is true he had a rudimentary pleasure in music⁠—and would sometimes ask her to play to him, when he would listen, and after his fashion enjoy. But although here was a gift that might be developed until his soul could echo the music of the spheres, the embodied souls of Handel or Mendelssohn were to him but clouds of sound wrapped about kernels⁠—let me say of stock or bonds.</p>
				<p>For a year or so after their marriage it had been the custom that, the first thing after breakfast on Monday morning, she should bring him her account-book, that they might together go over her week’s expenses. She must cultivate the business habits in which, he said, he found her more than deficient. How could he endure in a wife what would have been preposterous in a clerk, and would have led to his immediate dismissal? It was in his eyes necessary that the same strict record of receipt and expenditure should be kept in the household as in the office; how else was one to know in what direction things were going? he said. He required of his wife, therefore, that every individual thing that cost money, even to what she spent upon her own person, should be entered in her book. She had no money of her own, neither did he allow her any special sum for her private needs; but he made her a tolerably liberal weekly allowance, from which she had to pay everything except house-rent and taxes, an arrangement which I cannot believe a good one, as it will inevitably lead some conscientious wives to self-denial severer than necessary, and on the other hand will tempt the vulgar nature to make a purse for herself by mean savings off everybody else. It was especially distasteful to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster to have to set down every little article of personal requirement that she bought. It would probably have seemed to her but a trifle had they both been young when they married, and had there been that tenderness of love between them which so soon sets everything more than right; but as it was, she could never get over the feeling that the man was strange to her. As it was she would have got over this. But there was in her a certain constitutional lack of precision, combined with a want of energy and a weakness of will, that rendered her more than careless where her liking was not interested. Hence, while she would have been horrified at playing a wrong note or singing out of tune, she not only had no anxiety, for the thing’s own sake, to have her accounts correct, but shrunk from every effort in that direction. Now I can perfectly understand her recoil from the whole affair, with her added dislike to the smallness of the thing required of her; but seeing she did begin with doing it after a fashion, it is not so easy to understand why, doing it, she should not make a consolation of doing it with absolute exactness. Not even her dread of her husband’s dissatisfaction⁠—which was by no means small⁠—could prevail to make her, instead of still trusting a memory that constantly played her false, put down a thing at once, nor postpone it to a far less convenient season. Hence it came that her accounts, though never much out, never balanced; and the weekly audit, while it grew more and more irksome to the one, grew more and more unsatisfactory to the other. For to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster’s dusty eyes exactitude wore the robe of rectitude, and before long, precisely and merely from the continued unsatisfactory condition of her accounts, he began, in a hidden corner of his righteous soul, to reflect on the moral condition of his wife herself as unsatisfactory. Now such it certainly was, but he was not the man to judge it correctly, or to perceive the true significance of her failing. In business, while scrupulous as to the requirements of custom and recognized right, he nevertheless did things from which her soul would have recoiled like “the tender horns of cockled snails;” yet it was to him not merely a strange and inexplicable fact that she should <em>never</em> be able to show to a penny, nay, often not to a shilling or eighteenpence, how the week’s allowance went, but a painful one as indicating something beyond perversity. And truly it was no very hard task he required of her, for, seeing they had no children, only three servants, and saw little company, her housekeeping could not be a very heavy or involved affair. Perhaps if it had been more difficult she would have done it better, but anyhow she hated the whole thing, procrastinated, and setting down several things together, was <em>sure</em> to forget some article or mistake some price; yet not one atom more would she distrust her memory the next time she was tempted. But it was a small fault at worst, and if her husband had loved her enough to understand the bearings of it in relation to her mental and moral condition he would have tried to content himself that at least she did not exceed her allowance; and would of all things have avoided making such a matter a burden upon the consciousness of one so differently educated, if not constituted, from himself. It is but fair to add on the other side that, if she had loved him after anything like a wifely ideal, which I confess was not yet possible to her, it would not have been many weeks before she had a first correct account to show him. Convinced, at length, that accuracy was not to be had from her, and satisfying himself with dissatisfaction, he one morning threw from him the little ruled book, and declared, in a wrath which he sought to smother into dignified but hopeless rebuke, that he would trouble himself with her no further. She burst into tears, took up the book, left the room, cried a little, resolved to astonish him the next Monday, and never set down another item. When it came, and breakfast was over, he gave her the usual cheque, and left at once for town. Nor had the accounts ever again been alluded to between them.</p>
				<p>Now this might have been very well, or at least not very ill, if both had done tolerably well thereafter⁠—that is, if the one had continued to attend to her expenditure as well as before, and the other, when he threw away the account-book, had dismissed from his mind the whole matter. But Dempster was one of those dangerous men⁠—more dangerous, however, to themselves than to others⁠—who never forget, that is, get over, an offence or disappointment. They respect themselves so much, and, out of their respect for themselves, build so much upon success, set so much by never being defeated but always gaining their point, that when they are driven to confess themselves foiled, the confession is made from the “poor dumb mouth” of a wound that cannot be healed. It is there forever⁠—will be there at least until they find another God to worship than their own paltry selves. Hence it came that the bourn between the two spiritual estates yawned a little wider at one point, and a mist of dissatisfaction would not unfrequently rise from a certain stagnant pool in its hollow. The cause was paltry in one sense, but nothing to which belongs the name of “Cause” can fail to mingle the element of awfulness even with its paltriness. Its worst effect was that it hindered approximation in other parts of their marching natures.</p>
				<p>And as to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster, I am sorry for the apparent justification which what I have to confess concerning her must give to the severe whims of such husbands as hers: from that very Monday morning she began to grow a little careless about her expenditure⁠—which she had never been before. By degrees bill after bill was allowed to filch from the provision of the following week, and when that was devoured, then from that of the week after. It was not that she was in the least more expensive upon herself, or that she consciously wasted anything; but, altogether averse to housekeeping, she ceased to exercise the same outlook upon the expenditure of the house, did not keep her horses together, left the management more and more to her cook; while the consciousness that she was not doing her duty made her more and more uncomfortable, and the knowledge that things were going farther and farther wrong, made her hate the idea of accounts worse and worse, until she came at length to regard them with such a loathing as might have fitted some extreme of moral evil. The bills which were supposed by her husband to be regularly settled every week were at last months behind, and the week’s money spent in meeting the most pressing of its demands, while what it could no longer cover was cast upon the growing heap of evil for the time to come.</p>
				<p>I must say this for her, however, that there was a small sum of money she expected on the death of a crazy aunt, which, if she could but lay hold of it without her husband’s knowledge, she meant to devote to the clearing off of everything, when she vowed to herself to do better in the time to come.</p>
				<p>The worst thing in it all was that her fear of her husband kept increasing, and that she felt more and more uncomfortable in his presence. Hence that troubled look in her eye, always more marked when her husband sat dozing in his chair of a Sunday afternoon.</p>
				<p>It was natural, too, that, although they never quarrelled, their intercourse should not grow of a more tender character. Seldom was there a salient point in their few scattered sentences of conversation, except, indeed, it were some piece of news either had to communicate. Occasionally the wife read something from the newspaper, but never except at her husband’s request. In general he enjoyed his newspaper over a chop at his office. Two or three times since their marriage⁠—now eight years⁠—he had made a transient resolve pointing at the improvement of her mind, and to that end had taken from his great glass-armoured bookcase some <em>standard</em> work⁠—invariably, I believe, upon party-politics⁠—from which he had made her read him a chapter. But, unhappily, she had always got to the end of it without gaining the slightest glimmer of a true notion of what the author was driving at.</p>
				<p>It almost moves me to pity to think of the vagueness of that rudimentary humanity in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster which made him dream of doing something to improve his wife’s mind. What did he ever do to improve his own? It is hard to understand how horses find themselves so comfortable in their stables that, be the day ever so fine, the country ever so lovely, the air ever so exhilarating, they are always rejoiced to get back into their dull twilight: it is harder to me to understand how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster could be so comfortable in his own mind that he never wanted to get out of it, even at the risk of being beside himself; but no doubt the dimness of its twilight had a good deal to do with his content. And then there is that in every human mind which no man’s neighbour, nay, no man himself, can understand. My neighbour may in his turn be regarding my mind as a gloomy place to live in, while I find it no undesirable residence⁠—though chiefly because of the number of windows it affords me for looking out of it. Still, if Dempster’s dingy office in the City was not altogether a sufficing type of the mind that used it, I consider it a very fairly good one.</p>
				<p>But wherein was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster so very different from her husband as I rudely fancy some of my readers imagining her? Whatever may have been her reasons for marrying him⁠—one would suppose they must have been weighty⁠—to do so she must have been in a very undeveloped condition, and in that condition she still remained. I do not mean that she was less developed than ninety-nine out of the hundred: most women affect me only as valuable crude material out of which precious things are making. How much they might be, must be, shall be! For now they stand like so many Lot’s-wives⁠—so many rough-hewn marble blocks, rather, of which a Divinity is shaping the ends. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster had all the making of a lovely woman, but notwithstanding her grace, her beauty, her sweetness, her lark-like ballading too, she was a very ordinary woman in that region of her which knew what she meant when she said “I.” Of this fact she had hardly a suspicion, however; for until aspiration brings humility, people are generally pretty well satisfied with themselves, having no idea what poor creatures they are. She saw in her mirror a superior woman, regarded herself as one of the finer works of creation. The worst was that from the first she had counted herself superior to her husband, and in marrying him had felt not merely that she was conferring a favour, which every husband would allow, but that she was lowering herself without elevating him. Now it is true that she was pleasanter to look at, that her manners were sweeter, and her notions of the becoming far less easily satisfied than his; also that she was a little less deficient in vague reverence for certain forms of the higher than he. But I know of nothing in her to determine her classification as of greater value than he, except indeed that she was on the whole rather more honest. She read novels and he did not; she passed shallow judgment, where he scorned to judge; she read all the middling poetry that came in her way, and copied books full of it; but she could no more have appreciated one of Milton’s or Shakespeare’s smallest poems than she could have laughed over a page of Chinese. She liked to hear this and that popular preacher, and when her husband called his sermons humbug, she heard it with a shocked countenance; but was she better or worse than her husband when, admiring them as she did, she permitted them to have no more influence upon her conduct than if they had been the merest humbug ever uttered by ambitious demagogue? In truth, I cannot see that in the matter of worth there was much as yet to choose between them.</p>
				<p>It is hardly necessary, then, to say that there was little appreciable approximation of any kind going on between them. If only they would have read Dickens together! Who knows what might have come of it! But this dull close animal proximity, without the smallest conscious nearness of heart or mind or soul⁠—and so little chance, from very lack of wants, for showing each other kindnesses⁠—surely it is a killing sort of thing! And yet, and yet, there is always a something⁠—call it habit, or any poorest name you please⁠—grows up between two who are much together, at least when they neither quarrel nor thwart each other’s designs, which, tending with its roots towards the deeper human, blossoms into⁠—a wretched little flower indeed, yet afar off partaking of the nature of love. The Something seldom reveals its existence until they are parted. I suspect that with not a few, Death is the love-messenger at the stroke of whose dart the stream of love first begins to flow in the selfish bosom.</p>
				<p>It is now necessary to mention a little break in the monotony of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster’s life, which, but for what came afterwards, could claim no record. One morning her page announced Major Strong, and possibly she received the gentleman who entered with a brighter face than she had ever shown her husband. The major had just arrived from India. He had been much at her father’s house while she was yet a mere girl, being then engaged to one of her sisters, who died after he went abroad, and before he could return to marry her. He was now a widower, a fine-looking, frank, manly fellow. The expression of his countenance was little altered, and the sight of him revived in the memory of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster many recollections of a happy girlhood, when the prospect of such a life as she now led with tolerable content would have seemed simply unendurable. When her husband came home she told him as much as he cared to hear of the visitor she had had, and he made no objection to her asking him to dine the next Sunday. When he arrived <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster saw a man of his own age, bronzed and big, with not much waist left, but a good carriage and pleasant face. He made himself agreeable at dinner, appreciated his host’s wine, and told good stories that pleased the business man as showing that he knew “what was what.” He accorded him his more particular approval, speaking to his wife, on the ground that he was a man of the world, with none of the army slang about him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster was not aware that he had himself more business peculiarities than any officer in her majesty’s service had military ones.</p>
				<p>After this Major Strong frequently called upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster. They were good friends, and did each other no harm whatever, and the husband neither showed nor felt the least jealousy. They sang together, occasionally went out shopping, and three or four times went together to the play. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster, so long as he had his usual comforts, did not pine in his wife’s absence, but did show a little more pleasure when she came home to him than usually when he came home to her. This lasted for a few months. Then the major went back to India, and for a time the lady missed him a good deal, which, considering the dullness of her life, was not very surprising or reprehensible.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-butchers-bills-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">An Astonishment</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Now comes the strange part of my story.</p>
				<p>One evening the housemaid opened the door to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster on his return from the city; and perhaps the fact that it was the maid, and not the page as usual, roused his observation, which, except in business matters, was not remarkably operative. He glanced at the young woman, when an eye far less keen than his could not have failed to remark a strangely excited expression on her countenance.</p>
				<p>“Where is the boy?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“Just run to the doctor’s, sir,” she answered.</p>
				<p>Then first he remembered that when he left in the morning his wife had not been feeling altogether well, but he had never thought of her since.</p>
				<p>“How is your mistress?” he said.</p>
				<p>“She’s rather poorly, sir, but⁠—but⁠—she’s as well as could be expected.”</p>
				<p>“What does the fool mean?” said Dempster to himself, and very nearly said it aloud, for he was not over polite to any in his service. But he did not say it aloud. He advanced into the hall with deliberation, and made for the stair.</p>
				<p>“Oh, please sir,” the maid cried in a tone of perturbation, when, turning from shutting the door, she saw his intention, “you can’t go up to mis’ess’s room just at this minute, sir. Please go in the dining-room, sir.”</p>
				<p>“What do you mean?” he asked, turning angrily upon the girl, for of all things he hated mystery.</p>
				<p>Like everyone else in the house, and office both, she stood in awe of him, and his look frightened her.</p>
				<p>“Please go in the dining-room,” she gasped entreatingly.</p>
				<p>“What!” he said and did turn towards the dining-room, “is your mistress so ill she can’t see me?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no, sir!⁠—at least I don’t know exactly. Cook’s with her, sir. She’s over the worst, anyhow.”</p>
				<p>“What on earth do you mean, girl? Speak out, will you? What is the matter with your mistress?”</p>
				<p>As he spoke he stepped into the room, the maid following him. The same moment he spied a whitish bundle of something on the rug in front of the fire.</p>
				<p>“What do you mean by leaving things like that in the dining-room?” he went on more angrily still.</p>
				<p>“Please, sir,” answered the girl, going and lifting the bundle carefully, “it’s the baby!”</p>
				<p>“The baby!” shouted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster, and looked at her from head to foot. “What baby?” Then bethinking himself that it must belong to some visitor in the drawing-room with his wife, he moderated his tone. “Make haste; take it away!” he said. “I don’t want babies here! There’s a time and a place for everything!⁠—What <em>are</em> you about?”</p>
				<p>For, instead of obeying her master and taking it away, the maid was carefully looking in the blanket for the baby. Having found it and turned aside the covering from its face, she came nearer, and holding up the little vision, about the size and colour of a roll of red wax taper, said:⁠—</p>
				<p>“Look at it, sir! It’s your own, and worth looking at.”</p>
				<p>Never before had she dared speak to him so!</p>
				<p>I will not venture to assert that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster turned white, but his countenance changed, and he dropped into the chair behind him, feeling less of a business man than had been his consciousness for the last twenty years. He was hit hard. The absolutely Incredible had hit him. Babies might be born in a day, but surely not without previous preparation on the part of nature at least, if not on that of the mother; and in this case if the mother had prepared herself, certainly she had not prepared him for the event. It was as if the treasure of Nature’s germens were tumbling all together. His head swam. He could not speak a word.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir,” the maid went on, relieved of her trepidation in perceiving that her master too was mortal, and that her word had such power over him⁠—proud also of knowing more of his concerns than he did himself, “she was took about an hour and a half ago. We’ve kep’ sendin’ an’ sendin’ after the doctor, but he ain’t never been yet; only cook, she knows a deal an’ she says she’s been very bad, sir. But the young gentleman come at last, bless him! and now she’s doin’ as well as could be expected, sir⁠—cook says.”</p>
				<p>“God bless me!” said the astonished father, and relapsed into the silence of bewilderment.</p>
				<p>Eight years married with never a glimmer of offspring⁠—and now, all at once, and without a whisper of warning, the father of a “young gentleman!” How could it be other than perplexing⁠—discomposing, indeed!⁠—yet it was right pleasant too. Only it would have been more pleasant if experience could have justified the affair! Nature⁠—no, not Nature⁠—or, if Nature, then Nature sure in some unnatural mood, had stolen a march upon him, had gone contrary to all that had ever been revealed of her doings before! and why had she pitched on him⁠—just him, Duncan Dempster, to exercise one of her more grotesque and wayward moods upon?⁠—to play at hide-and-seek with after this fashion? She had not treated him with exactly proper respect, he thought, or, rather vaguely felt.</p>
				<p>“Business is business,” he remarked, under his breath, “and this cannot be called proper business behaviour. What is there about me to make game of? Really, my wife ought⁠—”</p>
				<p>What his wife ought or ought not to have done, however, had not yet made itself clear to him, and his endeavour to excogitate being in that direction broken off, gave way to the pleasure of knowing himself a father, or perhaps more truly of having an heir. In the strength of it he rose, went to the cellaret, and poured himself out a glass of his favourite port, which he sat down to drink in silence and meditation. He was rather a picture just then and there, though not a very lovely one, seated, with his hat still on his head, in the middle of the room, upon a chair halfway between the dining-table and the sideboard, with his glass of wine in his hand. He was pondering partly the pleasure, but still mainly the peculiarity of his position. A bishop once told me that, shortly after he had been raised to the episcopal dignity, a friend’s horses, whose driver had tumbled off the box drunk, ran away with him, and upset the carriage. He crept out of the window over his head, and the first thought that came to him as he sat perched on the side of the carriage, while it was jumbled along by the maddened horses, was, “What do bishops do in such circumstances?” Equally perplexing was the question Dempster had to ask himself: how husbands who, after being married eight years, suddenly and unexpectedly received the gift of a firstborn, were in the habit of comporting themselves! He poured himself out another glass, and with it came the reflection, both amusing and consoling, that his brother, who was confidently expecting his tidy five figures to crown the earthly bliss of one or more of his large family some day, would be equally but less agreeably surprised. “Serve him right!” he said to himself. “What business have they to be looking out for my death?” And for a moment the heavens appeared a little more just than he was ordinarily in the habit of regarding them. He said to himself he would work harder than ever now. There would now be some good in making money! He had never given his mind to it yet, he said: now the world should see what he could do when he did give his mind to it!</p>
				<p>Hitherto gathering had been his main pleasure, but with the thought of his money would now not seldom be mingled the thought of the little thing in the blanket! He began to find himself strangely happy. I use the wrong phrase⁠—for the fact is, he had never yet found himself at all; he knew nothing of the person except a self-painted and immensely flattered portrait that hung in the innermost chamber of his heart⁠—I mean the innermost chamber he knew anything of: there were many chambers there of which he did not even know the doors. Yet a few minutes as he sat there, and he was actually cherishing a little pride in the wife who had done so much better for him than he had at length come to expect. If not a good accountant, she was at least a good wife, and a very fair housekeeper: he had no doubt she would prove a good mother. He would gladly have gone to her at once, to let her know how much he was pleased with her behaviour. As for that little bit of red clay⁠—“terra cotta,” he called it to himself, as he looked round with a smile at the blanket, which the housemaid had replaced on the rug before the fire⁠—who could imagine him a potentate upon ’Change⁠—perhaps in time a director of European affairs! He was not in the way of joking⁠—of all things about money; the very thought, of business filled him from top to toe with seriousness; but he did make that small joke, and accompany it with a grim smile.</p>
				<p>He was startled from his musing by the entrance of the doctor, who had in the meantime arrived and seen the lady, and now came to look at the baby. He congratulated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster on having at length a son and heir, but warned him that his wife was far from being beyond danger yet. The whole thing was entirely out of the common, he said, and she must be taken the greatest possible care of. The words woke a gentle pity in the heart of the man, for by nature all men have some tenderness for women in such circumstances, but they did not trouble him greatly⁠—for such dangers belonged to their calling, their <em>business</em> in life, and, doubtless, if she had attended to that business earlier she would have found it easier.</p>
				<p>“Did you ever know such a thing before, doctor?” he asked, with the importance of one honoured by a personal visit from the Marvellous.</p>
				<p>“Never in my own practice,” answered the doctor, whom the cook had instructed in the wonders of the case, “but I have read of such a thing.” And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster swelled like a turkey-cock.</p>
				<p>It was several days before he was allowed to see the mother. Perhaps had she expressed a strong desire to see him, it might have been risked sooner, but she had neither expressed nor manifested any. He kissed her, spoke a few stupid words in a kind tone, asking her how she did, but paying no heed to her answer, and turned aside to look, at the baby.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster recovered but slowly, and not very satisfactorily. She did not seem to care much about the child. She tried to nurse him, but was not very successful. She took him when the nurse brought him, and yielded him again with the same indifference, showing neither pleasure to receive nor unwillingness to part with him. The nurse did not fail to observe it and remark upon it: <em>she</em> had never seen a mother care so little for her child! there was little of the mother in <em>her</em> anyway! it was no wonder she was so long about it. It troubled the father a little that she should not care for his child: some slight fermentation had commenced in the seemingly dead mass of human affection that had lain so long neglected in his being, and it seemed strange to him that, while he was living for the child in the City, she should be so indifferent to him at home. For already he had begun to keep his vow, already his greater keenness in business was remarked in the City. But it boded little good for either that the gift of God should stir up in him the worship of Mammon. More sons are damned by their fathers’ money than by anything else whatever outside of themselves.</p>
				<p>There was the excuse to be made for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster that she continued far from strong⁠—and her husband made it: he would have made it more heartily if he had himself ever in his life known what it was to be ill. By degrees she grew stronger, however, until, to persons who had not known her before, she would have seemed in tolerable health. For a week or two after she was again going about the house, she continued to nurse the baby, but after that she became unable to do so, and therewith began to neglect him entirely. She never asked to see him, and when the nurse brought him would turn her head aside, and tell her to take it away. So far from his being a pleasure to her, the very sight of the child brought the hot dew upon her forehead. Her husband frowned and wondered, but, unaccustomed to open his mind either to her or to anyone else, not unwisely sought to understand the thing before speaking of it, and in the meantime commenced a genuine attempt to make up to the baby for his mother’s neglect. Almost without a notion how even to take him in his arms, he would now send for him the moment he had had his tea, and after a fashion, ludicrous in the eyes of the nurse, would dandle and caress him, and strut about with him before his wife, glancing up at her every now and then, to point the lesson that such was the manner in which a parent ought to behave to a child. In his presence she never made any active show of her dislike, but her look seemed all the time fixed on something far away, as if she had nothing to do with the affair.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-butchers-bills-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Another Astonishment</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>But a second and very different astonishment awaited <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster. Again one evening, on his return from the City, he saw a strange look on the face of the girl who opened the door⁠—but this time it was a look of fear.</p>
				<p>“Well?” he said, in a tone at once alarmed and peremptory.</p>
				<p>She made no answer, but turned whiter than before.</p>
				<p>“Where is your mistress?” he demanded.</p>
				<p>“Nobody knows, sir,” she answered.</p>
				<p>“Nobody knows! What would you have me understand by such an answer?”</p>
				<p>“It’s the bare truth, sir. Nobody knows where she is.”</p>
				<p>“God bless me!” cried the husband. “What does it all mean?”</p>
				<p>And again he sunk down upon a chair⁠—this time in the hall, and stared at the girl as if waiting further enlightenment.</p>
				<p>But there was little enough to be had. Only one point was clear: his wife was nowhere to be found. He sent for everyone in the house, and cross-questioned each to discover the last occasion on which she had been seen. It was some time since she had been missed; how long before that she had been seen there was no certainty to be had. He ran to the doctor, then from one to another of her acquaintance, then to her mother, who lived on the opposite side of London. She, like the rest, could tell him nothing. In her anxiety she would have gone back with him, but he was surly, and would not allow her. It was getting towards morning before he reached home, but no relieving news awaited him. What to think was as much a perplexity to him as what to do. He was not in the agony in which a man would have been who thoroughly loved his wife, but he cared enough about her to feel uncomfortable; and the cries of the child, who was suffering from some ailment, made him miserable: in his perplexity and dull sense of helplessness he wondered whether she might not have given the baby poison before she went. Then the thing would make such a talk! and, of all things, Duncan Dempster hated being talked about. How busy people’s brains would be with all his affairs! How many explanations of the mystery would be suggested on ’Change! Some would say, “What business had a man like him with a fine lady for a wife? one so much younger than himself too!” He could remember making the same remark of another, before he was married. “Served him right!” they would say. And with that the first movement of suspicion awoke in him⁠—purely and solely from his own mind’s reflection of the imagined minds of others. While in his mind’s ear he heard them talking, almost before he knew what they meant the words came to him: “There was that Major Strong, you know!”</p>
				<p>“She’s gone to him!” he cried aloud, and, springing from the bed on which he had thrown himself, he paced the chamber in a fury. He had no word for it but hers that he was now in India! They had only been waiting till⁠—By heaven, that child was none of his! And therewith rushed into his mind the conviction that everything was thus explained. No man ever yet entertained an unhappy suspicion, but straightway an army of proofs positive came crowding to the service of the lie. It is astounding with what manifest probability everything will fall in to prove that a fact which has no foundation whatever! There is no end to the perfection with which a man may fool himself while taking absolute precautions against being fooled by others. Every fact, being a living fact, has endless sides and relations; but of all these, the man whose being hangs upon one thought, will see only those sides and relations which fall in with that thought. Dempster even recalled the words of the maid, “It’s mis’ess’s,” as embodying the girl’s belief that it was not master’s. Where a man, whether by nature jealous or not, is in a jealous condition, there is no need of an Iago to parade before him the proofs of his wrong. It was because Shakespeare would neither have Desdemona less than perfect, nor Othello other than the most trusting and least suspicious of men, that he had to invent an all but incredible villain to effect the needful catastrophe.</p>
				<p>But why should a man, who has cared so little for his wife, become instantly, upon the bare suspicion, so utter a prey to consuming misery? There was a character in his suffering which could not be attributed to any degree of anger, shame, or dread of ridicule. The truth was, there lay in his being a possibility of love to his wife far beyond anything his miserably stunted consciousness had an idea of; and the conviction of her faithlessness now wrought upon him in the office of Death, to let him know what he had lost. It magnified her beauty in his eyes, her gentleness, her grace; and he thought with a pang how little he had made of her or it.</p>
				<p>But the next moment wrath at the idea of another man’s child being imposed upon him as his, with the consequent loss of his precious money, swept every other feeling before it. For by law the child was his, whoever might be the father of it. During a whole minute he felt on the point of tying a stone about its neck, carrying it out, and throwing it into the river Lea. Then, with the laugh of a hyena, he set about arranging in his mind the proofs of her guilt. First came eight childless years with himself; next the concealment of her condition, and the absurd pretence that she had known nothing of it; then the trouble of mind into which she had fallen; then her strange unnatural aversion to her own child; and now, last of all, conclusive of a guilty conscience, her flight from his house. He would give himself no trouble to find her; why should he search after his own shame! He would neither attempt to conceal nor to explain the fact that she had left him⁠—people might say what they pleased⁠—try him for murder if they liked! As to the child she had so kindly left to console him for her absence, he would not drown him, neither would he bring him up in his house; he would give him an ordinary education, and apprentice him to a trade. For his money, he would leave it to a hospital⁠—a rich one, able to defend his will if disputed. For what was the child? A monster⁠—a creature that had no right to existence!</p>
				<p>Not one of those who knew him best would have believed him capable of being so moved, nor did one of them now know it, for he hid his suffering with the success of a man not unaccustomed to make a mask of his face. There are not a few men who, except something of the nature of a catastrophe befall them, will pass through life without having or affording a suspicion of what is in them. Everything hitherto had tended to suppress the live elements of Duncan Dempster; but now, like the fire of a volcano in a land of ice, the vitality in him had begun to show itself.</p>
				<p>Sheer weariness drove him, as the morning began to break, to lie down again; but he neither undressed nor slept, and rose at his usual hour. When he entered the dining-room, where breakfast was laid as usual⁠—only for one instead of two⁠—he found by his plate, among letters addressed to his wife, a packet directed to himself. It had not been through the post, and the address was in his wife’s hand. He opened it. A sheet of paper was wrapped around a roll of unpaid butcher’s bills, amounting to something like eighty pounds, and a note from the butcher craving immediate settlement. On the sheet of paper was written, also in his wife’s hand, these words: “I am quite unworthy of being your wife any longer;” that was all.</p>
				<p>Now here, to a man who had loved her enough to understand her, was a clue to the whole⁠—to Dempster it was the strongest possible confirmation of what he had already concluded. To him it appeared as certain as anything he called truth, that for years, while keeping a fair face to her husband⁠—a man who had never refused her anything⁠—he did not recall the fact that almost never had she asked or he offered anything⁠—she had been deceiving him, spending money she would not account for, pretending to pay everything when she had been ruining his credit with the neighbourhood, making him, a far richer man than any but himself knew, appear to be living beyond his means, when he was every month investing far more than he spent. It was injury upon injury! Then, as a last mark of her contempt, she had taken pains that these beggarly butcher’s bills should reach him from her own hand! He would trouble himself about such a woman not a moment longer!</p>
				<p>He went from breakfast to his omnibus as usual, walked straight to his office, and spent the day according to custom. I need hardly say that the first thing he did was to write a cheque for the butcher. He made no further inquiry after her whatever, nor was any made of him there, for scarcely one of the people with whom he did business had been to his house, or had even seen his wife.</p>
				<p>In the suburb where he lived it was different; but he paid no heed to any inquiry, beyond saying he knew nothing about her. To her relatives he said that if they wanted her they might find her for themselves. She had gone to please herself, and he was not going to ruin himself by running about the world after her.</p>
				<p>Night after night he came home to his desolate house; took no comfort from his child; made no confession that he stood in need of comfort. But he had a dull sensation as if the sun had forsaken the world, and an endless night had begun. The simile, of course, is mine⁠—the sensation only was his; <em>he</em> could never have expressed anything that went on in the region wherein men suffer.</p>
				<p>A few days made a marked difference in his appearance. He was a hard man; but not so hard as people had thought him; and besides, <em>no</em> man can rule his own spirit except he has the spirit of right on his side; neither is any man proof against the inroads of good. Even Lady Macbeth was defeated by the imagination she had braved. Add to this, that no man can, even by those who understand him best, be labelled as a box containing such and such elements, for the humanity in him is deeper than any individuality, and may manifest itself at some crisis in a way altogether beside expectation.</p>
				<p>His feeling was not at first of an elevated kind. After the grinding wrath had abated, self-pity came largely to the surface⁠—not by any means a grand emotion, though very dear to boys and girls in their first consciousness of self, and in them pardonable enough. On the same ground it must be pardoned in a man who, with all his experience of the world, was more ignorant of the region of emotion, and more undeveloped morally, than multitudes of children: in him it was an indication that the shell was beginning to break. He said to himself that he was old beside her, and that she had begun to weary of him, and despise him. Gradually upon this, however, supervened at intervals a faint shadow of pity for her who could not have been happy or she would not have left him.</p>
				<p>Days and weeks passed, and there was no sign of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster. The child was not sent out to nurse, and throve well enough. His father never took the least notice of him.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-butchers-bills-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">What It Meant</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Some of my readers, perhaps all of them, will have concluded that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster was a little out of her mind. Such, indeed, was the fact, and one not greatly to be wondered at, after such a peculiar experience as she had had. Some small degree of congestion, and the consequent pressure on some portion of the brain, had sent certain faculties to sleep, and, perhaps, roused others into morbid activity. That it is impossible to tell where sanity ends and insanity begins, is a trite remark indeed; but like many things which it is useless to say, it has the more need to be thought of. If I yield to an impulse of which I know I shall be ashamed, is it not the act of a madman? And may not the act lead to a habit, and at length to a despised, perhaps feared and hated, old age, twisting at the ragged ends of a miserable life?</p>
				<p>However certain it is that mental disorder had to do with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster’s departure from her home, it is almost as certain she would never have gone had it not been for the unpaid bills haunting her consciousness, a combination of demon and ghost. The misery had all the time been growing upon her, and must have had no small share in the subversion of her microcosm. When that was effected, the evil thing that lay at the root of it all rose and pounced upon her. Wrong is its own avenger. She had been doing wrong, and knowingly for years, and now the plant of evil was blossoming towards its fruit. If one say the evil was but a trifle, I take her judgment, not his, upon that. She had been lazy towards duty, had persistently turned aside from what she knew to be her business, until she dared not even look at it. And now that the crisis was at hand, as omened by that letter from the butcher, with the sense of her wrongdoing was mingled the terror of her husband. What would he think, say, and do? Not yet had she, after all these years, any deep insight into his character; else perhaps she might have read there that, much as he loved money, the pleasure of seeing signal failure follow the neglect of his instructions would quite compensate him for the loss. What the bills amounted to, she had not an idea. Not until she had made up her mind to leave her home could she muster the courage to get them together. Then she even counted up the total and set down the sum in her memory⁠—which sum thereafter haunted her like the name of her devil.</p>
				<p>As to the making up of her mind⁠—she could remember very little of that process⁠—or indeed of the turning of her resolve into action. She left the house in the plainest dress her wardrobe could afford her, and with just one half-crown in her pocket. Her design was to seek a situation, as a refuge from her husband and his wrath. It was a curious thing, that, while it gave her no trouble to leave her baby, whom indeed she had not that day seen, and to whom for some time she had ceased to be necessary, her only notion was to get a place as nurse.</p>
				<p>At that time, I presume, there were few or no such offices for engaging servants as are now common; at all events, the plan <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster took, when she had reached a part of London she judged sufficiently distant for her purpose, was to go from shop to shop inquiring after a situation. But she met with no prospect of success, and at last, greatly in need of rest and refreshment, went into a small coffee shop. The woman who kept it was taken by her appearance, her manners, and her evident trouble, and, happening to have heard of a lady who wanted a nurse, gave her the address. She went at once, and applied for the place. The lady was much pleased with her, and agreed to take her, provided she received a satisfactory character of her. For such a demand <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster was unprepared; she had never thought what reference she could give, and, her resources for deception easily exhausted, gave, driven to extremity, the name and address of her mother. So met the extremes of loss and salvation! She returned to the coffee shop, and the lady wrote at once to the address of the young woman’s late mistress, as she supposed.</p>
				<p>The kindness of her new friend was not exhausted; she gave her a share of her own bed that night. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster had now but two shillings, which she offered her, promising to pay her the rest out of the first wages she received. But the good woman would take no more than one of them, and that in full payment of what she owed her, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster left the shop in tears, to linger about the neighbourhood until the hour should arrive at which the lady had told her to call again. Apparently she must have cherished the hope that her mother, divining her extremity, would give her the character she could honestly claim. But as she drew near the door which she hoped would prove a refuge, her mother was approaching it also, and at the turning of a corner they ran into each other’s arms. The elderly lady had a hackney coach waiting for her in the next street, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster, too tired to resist, got into it at once at her mother’s desire. Ere they reached the mother’s house, which, as I have said, was a long way from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster’s, the daughter told everything, and the mother had perceived more than the daughter could tell: her eyes had revealed that all was not right behind them. She soothed her as none but a mother can, easily persuading her she would make everything right, and undertaking herself to pay the money owing to the butcher. But it was soon evident that for the present there must be no suggestion of her going back to her husband; for, imagining from something, that her mother was taking her to him, she jumped up and had all but opened the door of the cab when her mother succeeded in mastering her. As soon as she was persuaded that such had never been the intention, she was quiet. When they reached the house she was easily induced to go to bed at once.</p>
				<p>Her mother lived in a very humble way, with one servant, a trustworthy woman. To her she confided the whole story, and with her consulted as to what had better be done. Between them they resolved to keep her, for a while at least, in retirement and silence. To this conclusion they came on the following grounds: First, the daughter’s terror and the mother’s own fear of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster; next, it must be confessed, the resentment of both mistress and servant because of his rudeness when he came to inquire after her; third, the evident condition of the poor creature’s mind; and last, the longing of the two women to have her to themselves, that they might nurse and cosset her to their hearts’ content.</p>
				<p>They were to have more of this indulgence, however, than, for her sake, they would have desired, for before morning she was very ill. She had brain fever, in fact, and they had their hands full, especially as they desired to take every precaution to prevent the neighbourhood from knowing there was anyone but themselves in the house.</p>
				<p>It was a severe attack, but she passed the crisis favourably, and began to recover. One morning, after a quieter night than usual, she called her mother, and told her she had had a strange dream⁠—that she had a baby somewhere, but could not find him, and was wandering about looking for him.</p>
				<p>“Wasn’t it a curious dream, mamma?” she said. “I wish it were a true one. I knew exactly what my baby was like, and went into house after house full of children, sure that I could pick him out of thousands. I was just going up to the door of the Foundling Hospital to look for him there when I woke.”</p>
				<p>As she ceased, a strange trouble passed like a cloud over her forehead and eyes, and her hand, worn almost transparent by the fever followed it over forehead and eyes. She seemed trying to recall something forgotten. But her mother thought it better to say nothing.</p>
				<p>Each of the two nights following she had the same dream.</p>
				<p>“Three times, mother,” she said. “I am not superstitious, as you know, but I can’t help feeling as if it must mean something. I don’t know what to make of it else⁠—except it be that I haven’t got over the fever yet. And, indeed, I am afraid my head is not quite right, for I can’t be sure sometimes, such a hold has my dream of me, that I haven’t got a baby somewhere about the world. Give me your hand, mother, and sing to me.”</p>
				<p>Still her mother thought it more prudent to say nothing, and do what she could to divert her thoughts; for she judged it must be better to let her brain come right, as it were, of itself.</p>
				<p>In the middle of the next night she woke her with a cry.</p>
				<p>“O, mother, mother! I know it all now. I am not out of my mind any more. How I came here I cannot tell⁠—but I know I have a husband and a baby at Hackney⁠—and⁠—oh, such a horrible roll of butcher’s bills!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, yes, my dear! I know all about it,” answered her mother. “But never mind; you can pay them all yourself now, for I heard only yesterday that your aunt Lucy is dead, and has left you the hundred pounds she promised you twenty years ago.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, bless her!” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Dempster, springing out of bed, much to the dismay of her mother, who boded a return of the fever. “I must go home to my baby at once. But tell me all about it, mamma. How did I come here? I seem to remember being in a carriage with you, and that is the last I know.”</p>
				<p>Then, upon condition that she got into bed at once, and promised not to move until she gave her leave, her mother consented to tell her all she knew. She listened in silence, with face flushed and eyes glowing, but drank a cooling draught, lay down again, and at daybreak was fast asleep. When she awoke she was herself again.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-butchers-bills-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">What Came of It</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Meantime, things were going, as they should, in rather a dull fashion with Duncan Dempster. His chariot wheels were gone, and he drove heavily. The weather was good; he seldom failed of the box-seat on the omnibus; a ray of light, the first he had ever seen there, visited his table, reflected from a new window on the opposite side of a court into the heart of his dismal back office; and best of all, business was better than usual. Yet was Dempster not cheerful. He was not, indeed, a man an acquaintance would ever have thought of calling cheerful; but in grays there are gradations; and however differently a man’s barometer may be set from those of other people, it has its ups and downs, its fair weather and foul. But not yet had he an idea how much his mental equilibrium had been dependent upon the dim consciousness of having that quiet uninterested wife in the comfortable house at Hackney. It had been stronger than it seemed, the spidery, invisible line connecting that office and that house, along which had run twice a day the hard dumpling that dwelt in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster’s bosom. Vaguely connected with that home after all must have been that endless careful gathering of treasure in the city; for now, though he could no more stop making money than he could stop breathing, it had not the same interest as formerly. Indeed, he had less interest than before in keeping his lungs themselves going. But he kept on doing everything as usual.</p>
				<p>Not one of the men he met ever said a word to him about his wife. The general impression was that she had left him for preferable society, and no one wondered at her throwing aside such “a dry old stick,” whom even the devoted slaves of business contemned as having nothing in him but business.</p>
				<p>A further change was, however, in progress within him. The first sign of it was that he began to doubt whether his wife had indeed been false to him⁠—had forsaken him in any other company than that of Death. But there was one great difficulty in the way of the conclusion. It was impossible for him to imagine suicide as proceeding from any cause but insanity, and what could have produced the disorder in one who had no cares or anxieties, everything she wanted, and nothing to trouble her, a devoted husband, and a happy home? Yet the mere idea made him think more pitifully, and so more tenderly of her than before. It had not yet occurred to him to consider whether he might not have had something to do with her conduct or condition. Blame was a thing he had never made acquaintance with⁠—least of all in the form of self-blame. To himself he was simply all right⁠—the poised centre of things capable of righteous judgment on everyone else. But it must not be forgotten how little he knew about his own affairs at all; his was a very different condition from that of one who had closed his eyes and hardened his heart to suspicions concerning himself. His eyes had never yet been opened to anything but the order of things in the money world⁠—its laws, its penalties, its rewards⁠—those he did understand. But apparently he was worth troubling. A slow dissatisfaction was now preying upon him⁠—a sense of want⁠—of not having something he once had, a vague discomfort, growing restless. This feeling was no doubt the worse that the birth of the child had brought such a sudden rush of fresh interest into his occupation, which doubt concerning that birth had again so suddenly checked; but even if the child should prove after all his own, a supposition he was now willing to admit as possibly a true one, he could never without his mother feel any enthusiasm about him, even such enthusiasm as might be allowed to a man who knew money from moonshine, and common sense from hysterics. Yet once and again, about this time, the nurse coming into the room after a few minutes’ absence, found him bending over the sleeping infant, and, as she described him, “looking as if he would have cried if he had only known how.”</p>
				<p>One frosty evening in late autumn the forsaken husband came from London⁠—I doubt if he would now have said “home”⁠—as usual, on the top of the omnibus. His was a tough nature physically, as well as morally, and if he had found himself inside an omnibus he would have thought he was going to die. The sun was down. A green hue rose from the horizon halfway to the zenith, but a pale yellow lingered over the vanished sun, like the gold at the bottom of a chrysolite. The stars were twinkling small and sharp in the azure overhead. A cold wind blew in little gusts, now from this side, now from that, as they went steadily along. The horses’ hoofs rang loud on the hard road. The night got hold of him: it was at this season, and on nights like these, that he had haunted the house of Lucy’s father, doing his best to persuade her to make him, as he said, a happy man. It now seemed as if then, and then only, he had been a happy man. Certainly, of all his life, it was the time when he came nearest to having a peep out of the upper windows of the house of life. He had been a dweller in the lower regions, a hewer of wood to the god of the cellar; and after his marriage, he had gone straight down again to the temple of the earthy god⁠—to a worship whose god and temple and treasure caves will one day drop suddenly from under the votary’s feet, and leave him dangling in the air without even a pocket about him⁠—without even his banker’s book to show for his respectability.</p>
				<p>The night, I say, recalled the lovely season of his courtship, and again, in the mirror of loss, he caught a glimpse of things beyond him. Ah, if only that time and its hopes had remained with him! How different things would have been now! If Lucy had proved what he thought her!⁠—remained what she seemed⁠—the gentle, complaisant, yielding lady he imagined her, promising him a life of bliss! Alas, she would not even keep account of five pounds a week to please him! He never thought whether he, on his part, might not have, in some measure, come short of her expectations in a husband; whether she, the more lovely in inward design and outward fashion, might not have indulged yet more exquisite dreams of bliss which, by devotion to his ideal of life, he had done his part in disappointing. He only thought what a foolishness it all was; that thus it would go on to the end of the book; that youth after youth would have his turn of such a wooing, and such a disappointment. Sunsets, indeed! The suns of man’s happiness never did anything but set! Out of money even⁠—and who could say there was any poetry in that?⁠—there was not half the satisfaction to be got that one expected. It was all a mess of expectations and disappointments mashed up together⁠—nothing more. That was the world⁠—on a fair judgment.</p>
				<p>Such were his reflections till the driver pulled up for him to get down at his own gate. As he got down the said driver glanced up curiously at the row of windows on the first floor, and as soon as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster’s back was turned, pointed to them with the butt-end of his whip, and nodded queerly to the gentleman who sat on his other side.</p>
				<p>“That’s more’n I’ve seen this six weeks,” he said. “There’s something more’n common up this evenin’, sir.”</p>
				<p>There was light in the drawing-room⁠—that was all the wonder; but at those windows <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster himself looked so fixedly that he had nearly stumbled up his own doorsteps.</p>
				<p>He carried a latchkey now, for he did not care to stand at the door till the boy answered the bell; people’s eyes, as they passed, seemed to burn holes in the back of his coat.</p>
				<p>He opened the street door quietly, and went straight up the stair to the drawing-room. Perhaps he thought to detect some liberty taken by his servants. He was a little earlier than usual. He opened that door, took two steps into the room, and stood arrested, motionless. With his shabby hat on his head, his shabby greatcoat on his back⁠—for he grudged every penny spent on his clothes⁠—his arms hanging down by his sides, and his knees bent, ready to tremble, he looked not a little out of keeping in the soft-lighted, dainty, delicate-hued drawing-room. Could he believe his eyes? The light of a large lamp was centred upon a gracious figure in white⁠—his wife, just as he used to see her before he married her! That was the way her hair would break loose as she ran down the stair to meet him!⁠—only then there was no baby in her lap for it to full over like a torrent of unlighted water over a white stone! It was a lovely sight.</p>
				<p>He had stood but a moment when she looked up and saw him. She started, but gave no cry louder than a little moan. Instantly she rose. Turning, she laid the baby on the sofa, and flitted to him like a wraith. Arrived where he stood yet motionless, she fell upon her knees and clasped his. He was far too bewildered now to ask himself what husbands did in such circumstances, and stood like a block.</p>
				<p>“Husband! husband!” she cried, “forgive me.” With one hand she hid her face, although it was bent to the ground, and with the other held up to him a bit of paper. He took it from the thin white fingers; it might explain something⁠—help him out of this bewilderment, half nightmare, half heavenly vision. He opened it. Nothing but a hundred-pound note! The familiar sight of bank paper, however, seemed to restore his speech.</p>
				<p>“What does this mean, Lucy? Upon my word! Permit me to say⁠—”</p>
				<p>He was growing angry.</p>
				<p>“It is to pay the butcher,” she said, with a faltering voice.</p>
				<p>“Damn the butcher!” he cried. “I hope you’ve got something else to say to me! Where have you been all this time?”</p>
				<p>“At my mother’s. I’ve had a brain fever, and been out of my mind. It was all about the butcher’s bill.”</p>
				<p>Dempster stared. Perhaps he could not understand how a woman who would not keep accounts should be to such a degree troubled at the result of her neglect.</p>
				<p>“Look at me, if you don’t believe me,” she cried, and as she spoke she rose and lifted her face to his.</p>
				<p>He gazed at it for a moment⁠—pale, thin, and worn; and out of it shone the beautiful eyes, larger than before, but shimmering uncertain like the stars of a humid night, although they looked straight into his.</p>
				<p>Something queer was suddenly the matter with his throat⁠—something he had never felt before⁠—a constriction such as, had he been superstitious, he might have taken for the prologue to a rope. Then the thought came⁠—what a brute he must be that his wife should have been afraid to tell him her trouble! Thereupon he tried to speak, but his throat was irresponsive to his will. Eve’s apple kept sliding up and down in it, and would not let the words out. He had never been so served by members of his own body in his life before! It was positive rebellion, and would get him into trouble with his wife. There it was! Didn’t he say so?</p>
				<p>“Can’t you forgive me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dempster?” she said, and the voice was so sweet and so sad! “It is my own money. Aunt Lucy is dead, and left it me. I think it will be enough to pay all my debts; and I promise you⁠—I do promise you that I will set down every halfpenny after this. Do try me once again⁠—for baby’s sake.”</p>
				<p>This last was a sudden thought. She turned and ran to the sofa. Dempster stood where he was, fighting the strange uncomfortable feeling in his throat. It would not yield a jot. Was he going to die suddenly of choking? Was it a judgment upon him? Diphtheria, perhaps! It was much about in the City!</p>
				<p>She was back, and holding up to him their sleeping child.</p>
				<p>The poor fellow was not half the brute he looked⁠—only he could <em>not</em> tell what to do with that confounded lump in his throat! He dared not try to speak, for it only choked him the more. He put his arms round them both, and pressed them to his bosom. Then, the lump in his throat melted and ran out at his eyes, and all doubt vanished like a mist before the sun. But he never knew that he had wept. His wife did, and that was enough.</p>
				<p>The next morning, for the first time in his life, he lost the eight o’clock omnibus.</p>
				<p>The following Monday morning she brought her week’s account to him. He turned from it testily, but she insisted on his going over it. There was not the mistake of a halfpenny. He went to town with a smile in his heart, and that night brought her home a cheque for ten pounds instead of five.</p>
				<p>One day, in the middle of the same week, he came upon her sitting over the little blue-and-red-ruled book with a troubled countenance. She took no notice of his entrance.</p>
				<p>“Do leave those accounts,” he said, “and attend to me.”</p>
				<p>She shook her head impatiently, and made him no other answer. One moment more, however, and she started up, threw her arms about his neck, and cried triumphantly,</p>
				<p>“It’s buttons!⁠—fourpence-halfpenny I paid for buttons!”</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
